## pgn_parser

pgn_parser parses .pgn files (who would've thought) and emits CSV files based on the provided database schema. When running the pipeline, it will build and run the parser, initialize the database, and load the CSVs into the database.

There are provided test queries to make sure the database was populated correctly.

#### Table of Contents

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Building](#building)
- [Running](#running)
  - [Manually](#manually)
  - [Auto Setup](#automatic-docker)
- [Tests](#tests)
- [Tips](#tips)

#### Requirements

- Zig >= 0.15
- MariaDB/MySQL \
  OR
- Docker
- Docker Compose

### Building

---

> [!Important]
> See [Automatic (Docker)](#automatic-docker) for building and running in an isolated environment

[Zig](https://ziglang.org) >= 0.15 is required for this project. Check your repository to see what version is available. If no sufficient version is, use

```bash
wget https://ziglang.org/download/0.15.2/zig-x86_64-linux-0.15.2.tar.xz
tar -xf zig-x86_64-linux-0.15.2.tar.xz
mv zig-x86_64-linux-0.15.2 ~/.local/zig
ln -s ~/.local/zig/zig /usr/local/bin/zig
rm zig-x86_64-linux-0.15.2.tar.xz

```

Then grab and build the project

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jpwol/pgn_parser.git
cd pgn_parser
zig build
```

Additionally, you'll need MariaDB/MySQL, however it's provided for your distrobution.

> [!Important]
> To run the pipeline, you must have automatic authentication setup for MariaDB/MySQL. This is done through the ~/.my.cnf file. Create it if it does not exist, and add
>
> ```cnf
> [client]
> user=<your username>
> password=<your password>
> ```

> [!Note]
> For large PGN files, it's worth noting that a small buffer pool size will drastically increase database insertion times.
>
> To speed things up, you may want to increase this. Refer to [Tips](#tips) for instructions.

### Running

---

#### Manually

Assuming you want to run it manually, the scripts provided make it very easy.
After running `zig build`, you'll want to run the `run_pipeline.sh` script. This script takes a PGN file as an argument, and the default value is `testfile.pgn`.

```bash
# if using a file NOT named 'testfile.pgn'
./run_pipeline.sh <file>

# if using a file named 'testfile.pgn'
./run_pipeline.sh
```

You can run any part of the pipeline separately though.

- `bin/pgn_parser <file>` will run the parser and emit the CSVs.
- `generate_loader.sh` generates the SQL file necessary for loading the CSV files into the database.
- `remove_db.sh` checks if the "chess" database already exists and drops it if so.
- `init_db.sh` initializes a new database using `schema.sql`, and loads the CSVs using `load.sql` (generated by the previous script)

#### Automatic (Docker)

This project uses [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) for isolated use cases. To get started, you'll want to run it like this

```bash
PGN_FILE=/path/to/your/pgn docker compose up
```

This will spawn a container to build and run the parser, and a _persistent_ database container.

The database container can be interacted with in a few ways:

1. Assuming you have **mariadb** on your system

```bash
mariadb -h 127.0.0.1 -P 3307 -u root -proot chess
```

2. If you **don't** have mariadb on your system

```bash
docker exec -it chess-db-1 mariadb -u root -proot chess # assumes the container is named chess-db-1, please verify
```

> [!Warning]
> The MariaDB container is configured to use 4GB of memory for the buffer pool.
> If this is too much for your system, edit the value in `mariadb.cnf`.
>
> You can also increase this value to allow for a larger buffer pool, but this is probably unnecessary.

##### Stopping and Starting the Container

To stop the container but keep the database intact, simply run `docker compose down`.

If you want to nuke the database, use `docker compose down -v` instead.

To restart the container, either run `docker compose up` which will try to rerun the parser, but will skip if the database is already populated, or run `docker compose up db` to only run the database container.

### Tests

There are provided tests for the database. Run them with

```bash
mariadb chess < tests/file

# or for pretty output,
mariadb --table chess < tests/file
```

### Tips

---

#### Buffer Pool Size

InnoDB is the storage engine for MariaDB/MySQL. By default, InnoDB usually has a buffer pool size of 128MB. This size is sufficient for batch insertion, but for bulk inserts like with the CSV files emmitted from the parser, it might not cut it.

Depending on how much physical memory you have, the value you'd wish to set this to may change.

Also note that InnoDB recommends you set the buffer pool size as a multiple of the buffer pool chunk size. If you are on a recent version of MariaDB (10.5+), this has been deprecated, but if you aren't, you can check it with `mariadb -e "SHOW VARIABLES LIKE 'innodb_buffer_pool_chunk_size'"`.

**Arch Linux**

On Arch, you can permanently increase your buffer pool size by either

1. Editing `/etc/my.cnf`

```cnf

[client-server]            # look for or create this header
innodb_buffer_pool_size=4G # insert this line with whatever value you please
```

2. Editing `/etc/my.cnf.d/server.cnf`

```cnf
[mysqld]                   # look for this header
innodb_buffer_pool_size=4G # again, this is the line you want to insert
```

**Ubuntu**

As far as I'm aware, you'd want to edit `/etc/mysql/mariadb.conf.d/50-server.cnf`:

```cnf
[mysqld]                   # look for this header
innodb_buffer_pool_size=4G # again, this is the line you want to insert
```

As I don't have an Ubuntu machine, this could be wrong, so do some investigating yourself.

**Other Distros or OS**

Unfortunately, I have no clue. It's most likely very similar to what's been mentioned above, just do some snooping.
